# dockstore-workflow-rnaseq

A workflow for processing bulk RNA Sequencing datasets.

# Description

This workflow automates and standardizes the processing of bulk RNASeq datasets. The following steps are performed:

* Download input BAM alignment files using the [Synapse Client](https://python-docs.synapse.org//build/html/CommandLineClient.html)
* Sort input BAM alignment files using [Picard SortSam](https://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/command-line-overview.html#SortSam)
* Convert sorted BAM files into FastQ files using [Picard SamToFastQ](https://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/command-line-overview.html#SamToFastq)
* Align reads to the reference genome using the [STAR Aligner](https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR)
* Generate raw gene expression counts using the [STAR Aligner](https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR) --quantMode (similar to the HTSeq algorithm)
* Collect RNASeq metrics from re-aligned bam files using [Picard CollectRNASeqMetrics](https://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/command-line-overview.html#CollectRnaSeqMetrics)
* Collect Alignment summary statistics from re-aligned bam files using [Picard AlignmentSummaryMetrics](https://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/command-line-overview.html#CollectAlignmentSummaryMetrics)

## CWL

Three main workflows are present in the root of this repository:

* [bam_paired.cwl](bam_paired.cwl): This workflow processes input BAM files from paired-end sequencing reads
* [fastq_paired.cwl](fastq_paired.cwl): This workflow processes paired end fastq files
* [fastq_single.cwl](fastq_single.cwl): This workflow processes single end fastq files

Subworkflows that the main workflows utilize are present in the [subworkflows](subworkflows) folder. 

## Required Job Inputs

Each workflow requires the following inputs:

* `cwl_wf_url`: A URL that points to a tagged version of the github repository at the time of job submission. "https://github.com/Sage-Bionetworks-Workflows/dockstore-workflow-rnaseq/tree/5832931a9569d9d8fba26a36146a682870d6f5f7", for example. 
* `cwl_args_url`: A raw github URL that points to the input parameters file for the job that you are running. "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Sage-Bionetworks-Workflows/dockstore-workflow-rnaseq/5832931a9569d9d8fba26a36146a682870d6f5f7/jobs/test-paired-bam/job.json", for example. 
* `index_synapseid`: Synapse ID for the folder that contains a STAR-indexed reference genome. An example can be found in `syn22152278`
* `nthreads`: An integer value that represents the number of compute threads that the STAR aligner should use. 
* `synapse_parentid`: Synapse ID for the folder that output tables will be uploaded to. 
* `synapse_config`: Synapse configuration file that will be used to authenticate data downloads and uploads during workflow execution
* `synapseid`: List of Synapse ID's that correspond to input reads for processing. For the bam_paired.cwl workflow, the ID's should point to BAM files. For the fastq_paired.cwl workflow, these ID's should point to compressed fastq files for the forward reads. For the fastq_single.cwl workflow, these ID's should point to compressed fastq files. These files must contain a `specimenID` annotation in Synapes

The fastq_paired.cwl workflow also requires the following input:

* `synapseid_2`: A list of Synase ID's that correspond to the reverse reads in compressed fastq.gz format. These files must contain a `specimenID` annotation in Synapse, and this list should be ordered by specimen to match the `synapesid` list.

### Optional Job inputs

You can optionally supply an input parameter that specifies the strandedness of the library that was generated for your dataset. To do so, add the `strand_specificity` argument to your job.json file. The three valid options for this parameter are:

* `NONE`
* `FIRST_READ_TRANSCRIPTION_STRAND`
* `SECOND_READ_TRANSCRIPTION_STRAND`

If this argument is not provided, the default value of `NONE` will be used. 

## Workflow Outputs

The following output files are uploaded to Synapse during workflow execution:

* `gene_all_counts_matrix.txt`: Table containing raw gene counts, where row labels are geneid's and column labels are synapseid's for input files
* `gene_all_counts_matrix_clean.txt`: The same gene count table, but synapseid's have been converted to specimenID's and any duplicate samples were removed
* `Star_Log_Merged.txt`: Table containing mapping statistics that were parsed from the STAR aligner log files
* `Star_Log_Merged_clean.txt`: The same mapping statistics table, but synapseid's have been converted to specimenID's and any duplicate samples were removed
* `Study_all_metrics_matrix.txt`: A table containing statistics about realigned BAM files, as generated by picardtools
* `Study_all_metrics_matrix_clean.txt`: The same table containing realigned BAM file statistics, but synapseid's have been converted to specimenID's and any duplicate samples were removed
* `provenance.csv`: A csv file where the first field contains the synapseid's for all input files that were used in the processing workflow, the second field contains the version of the synapseid that was used, and the third field contains the corresponding specimenID from the Synapse annotation

## Tests

[`cwltest`](https://github.com/common-workflow-language/cwltest) is used for
testing. Add test descriptions to `tests/test-descriptions.yaml`. Each test
added requires a file describing the job inputs that should be added to the
[tests](tests) directory.

### Integration Tests

Integration tests are automatically performed on any push to the master branch that does not contain the `[skip-ci]` string in the commit message. Test data is stored on a project in Synapse, and is accessed using a service account that has credentials stored as github secrets in this repository.

## Continuous Deployment and Versioning

This repository uses GitHub actions to run tests and perform automated versioning.

### CI
Defined in [.github/workflows/ci.yaml](.github/workflows/ci.yaml), this action
runs on each push to master where the commit does not contain '[skip-ci]'.

### Versioning
Versioning is achieved through git tagging using
[semantic versioning](https://semver.org/). Each push to master will generate an
increment to the patch value, unless the commit contains the string '[skip-ci]'.

Use the release script to do a minor or major release. 
To create a minor release, run `python utils/release.py` from the project root.
To create a major release, run the same command but add the flag `--major`.

The release script has dependencies which can be installed to virtual
environment using [pipenv](https://pipenv.pypa.io/en/latest/). After installing
pipenv, run `pipenv install` to install the dependencies, and `pipenv shell`
to activate the environment.

Alternately, to do a minor or major releases manually:
1. Determine what the tag value will be. For example, to make a minor release from v0.1.22, the next tag would be v0.2.0.
1. In the CWL tools, change the docker version to use that tag, and create a commit like "Update docker version in cwl tools in preparation for minor release"
1. Run the tagging commmand: `git tag v0.2.0`
1. Push the tag: `git push --tags`

#### Branch Versioning
Optionally, you can set up your repository for running the CI action on pushes
to all branches, not just master. This is not the default behavior because it
introduces complexity and requires that you use git in a certain way.

To set this up, in `.github/workflows/ci.yaml`, change `master` to `'*'` in the
event filter ( on > push > branches). This will cause pushes to non-master tags
to also build. They will be tagged with this pattern: <semver>-<git-short-sha>,
e.g. `v1.0.0-197e187`.

If you choose to make this change, for best results we recommend that you also
use the no-fast-forward flag (`--no-ff`) when merging branches to master. Using
that flag will ensure that a new merge commit is created, and CI will run
correctly. Without a new merge commit, versioning won't work correctly.

